---
layout: post
title: whoami
---

### Personal Details
I am a **software engineer** currently working and residing inside of Bellevue, WA. Right now I am happily 
employed at [Salesforce](http://www.salesforce.com) [CRM](http://www.marketwatch.com/investing/stock/crm) - and previously have worked at a number of startups as both a FTE and contractor.

Although I was originally born and raised in Bozeman, MT - I always had a strong aptitude for technology which
drove me to migrate west in search of new and exciting opportunities.

### Skills & Technologies
I am a big advocate of **full-stack JavaScript**. 

I am quite fond of **EmberJS** on the front-end, as it allows for
a very high level of developer productivity right out of the box - while not sacrificing maintainability or 
performance. EmberJS is a no-frills, down to the earth framework that avoids jumping on top of JavaScript trends,
and instead develops at a slightly slower pace than the rest of the JavaScript world so that the risk of poor 
design choices influced by hype are minimized.

As for API's - I find the **NodeJS / ExpressJS** stack to offer a lot of up-front simplicity, alongside robust flexibility
and customization support. I find that NodeJS/ExpressJS API's offer excellent performance both technically, and in terms
of developer productivity. While the NPM ecosystem often contains half-developed, and often outdated packages - there
are some stars that shine through and outclass many of the tools that I've used on other API stacks.

For databases I am a huge fan of **MongoDB** and **PostgreSQL** depending on the type of dating being stored. I have also
worked extensively with **MySQL** and **Microsoft SQL Server** but find both implementations to be behind the times and bloated
compared to their open-source competition.

Beyond my favorite languages and tools, I have also used: **C#**, **Java** and **PHP** professionally.

I am currently learning the Salesforce stack: **Apex**, **Aura**, **SLDS**, and **SOQL**.

### Hobbies

TODO

